[![MOBIOlogo](http://press.igsb.anl.gov/earthmicrobiome/files/2011/01/MOBIOlogo-300x103.jpg)](http://www.mobio.com/)
The Earth Microbiome Project is a global project which will require
processing as many as 200,000 samples from the most diverse and
difficult sample set ever attempted. MO BIO Laboratories, Inc. welcomes
the challenge of supplying a standard nucleic acid isolation method
which will help scientists from around the world create a database
without bias introduced from sample processing. MO BIO will help sponsor
this project through donations of Power DNA kits for process validation
of the initial 10,000 environmental samples. The kits utilize patented
Inhibitor Removal Technology for removal of enzyme inhibiting
substances. It is this same technology which will provide a tool that
enables the scientists of the EMP to look at the genomes of the many
different microbes living in soil, water, sediment, air and plant
specimens. This is an important project and MO BIO is proud to be a
recognized sponsor.
![EP\_Logo\_RGB](http://press.igsb.anl.gov/earthmicrobiome/files/2011/01/EP_Logo_RGB1-300x61.jpg)
Eppendorf is a life sciences company which develops, manufactures and
distributes equipment and consumables for use in all areas of life
science. The company's broad range of high quality products are used by
researchers worldwide to efficiently carry out their work. Eppendorfs
well documented experience in developing and manufacturing automated
pipetting systems has made them an excellent partner for the Earth
microbiome project, which will maintain the strictest requirements for
the automated sample preparation and high throughput analysis of over
200,000 samples using the epMotion automated pipetting system from
Eppendorf.
[![](http://press.igsb.anl.gov/earthmicrobiome/files/2011/01/lucatechnologieslogo-300x239.jpg)](http://www.lucatechnologies.com/)
Luca Technologies extends natural gas production in depleting formations
of organic rich, hydrocarbon bearing habitats.  Stable, long-term
generation of pure biogenic natural gas is achieved by enhancing the
microbial conversion of coal, gas, oil and organic-rich shale wells into
biogenic methane.  Luca's environmentally benign process restores
subsurface microbial habitats to optimal conditions, recycling water and
sustainably farming the low-cost biogenic natural gas created by these
revitalized ecosystems.  Luca Technologies has a strong interest in
subsurface anaerobic environments, their associated microbial
communities, as well as the Earth environmental parameter space as a
whole.  How these different environments and their microbial community
members interact and function as a whole is an essential element of
understanding global ecology particularly in extreme environments.  The
Earth Microbiome Project is attempting to tackle just such a scientific
challenge, and Luca Technologies is proud to support them financially,
as well as through scientific collaboration and access to samples from
diverse subsurface environments.
[![](http://press.igsb.anl.gov/earthmicrobiome/files/2011/01/ILLUMINA_LOGO_CMYK_new-300x67.png)](http://www.illumina.com)
Illumina enables discovery by providing comprehensive DNA and RNA
analysis solutions, including genotyping and copy number analysis, gene
expression, sequencing, and epigenetics: the cornerstones of genetic
research. Our portfolio of tools integrates our sequencing and
microarray technologies, as well as powerful assay protocols to make
possible a new scale of biological research.
[![](http://press.igsb.anl.gov/earthmicrobiome/files/2011/01/PacBio-Logo-300x113.jpg)](http://www.pacificbiosciences.com/)
Pacific Biosciences has developed a novel approach to studying the
synthesis and regulation of DNA, RNA and protein that enables real-time
analysis of biomolecules with single molecule resolution and providing a
window into these systems that has not previously been open
for scientific study. Pacific Biosciences is eager to explore how
application of SMRT sequencing can aid in the taxonomic and
functional characterization of microbial communities. The longer
sequence read length, ability to detect chemical modifications in bases
in an objective, data driven fashion, and fast turnaround time can lead
to the possibility of performing real-time monitoring of environments.
Characterizing microbial communities in a diversity of environments
across the globe will be critical for elucidating the roles these
communities play in the overall wellbeing of geographic regions and in
the greater health of the planet.  Pacific Biosciences is proud to
partner with The Earth Microbiome Project to explore the power and
possibilities of third generation DNA sequencing to address these
critical issues.
![G10K-Teal-c-72\_res\_web\_small\_043009](http://press.igsb.anl.gov/earthmicrobiome/files/2011/01/G10K-Teal-c-72_res_web_small_043009-300x136.jpg)
The EMP works with a number of other efforts such as [Genome
10K](http://www.genome10k.org/ "Genome 10k"); The Genome 10K project
aims to sequence a type strain from 10,000 vertebrate genera. The EMP is
coordinating with Genome 10K to also characterize the native microbiome
of many vertebrate species, please see San Diego Zoo Study under
Projects.
![Full\_gsc\_logo\_large\_2010](http://press.igsb.anl.gov/earthmicrobiome/files/2011/01/Full_gsc_logo_large_2010-300x59.png)
The EMP is associated with the [Genomic Standards
Consortium](http://www.gensc.org). One major aspect is the provision of
metadata, that is data which describes the sample, experiment, and
environment the sequence comes from. The Genomic Standards Consortium
(www.gensc.org) as developed a series of data standards which will be
adopted by the EMP for recording the sequence data it generates. The
data will adhere to the Minimal Information checklists, specifically
minimal information about a metagenomic sequence (MIMS) and minimal
information about a marker gene sequence (MIMARKS) which describe the
information the community is interested in about your sequence. These
standards have been adopted by the INSDC, which is the body which
oversees international sequence data deposition, and MIMS or MIMARKS
compliant data are acknowledged by a GSC tag. The MIENS standard can be
accessed on www.gensc.org and via [Nature
Proceedings](http://precedings.nature.com/documents/5252/version/2 "MIENS and Nature Proceedings").
[![](http://press.igsb.anl.gov/earthmicrobiome/files/2012/06/OceanSamplingDayLogo.jpg)](http://press.igsb.anl.gov/earthmicrobiome/files/2012/06/OceanSamplingDayLogo.jpg)
The Earth Microbiome Project is working in partnership with the Micro B3
Consortium’s [Ocean Sampling Day](http://www.oceansamplingday.org) by
coordinating sample processing (DNA extraction, PCR for 16S/18S/ITS
rRNA) and sequencing of water samples collected from locations around
the world. The first samples are from the pilot study on the June 20th
2012 solstice.
[![](http://press.igsb.anl.gov/earthmicrobiome/files/2012/06/GenomicObservatoriesLogo.png)](http://press.igsb.anl.gov/earthmicrobiome/files/2012/06/GenomicObservatoriesLogo.png)
The Earth Microbiome Project is working in partnership with the [Genomic
Observatories Network](http://www.genomicobservatories.org) to help
coordinate microbial community analysis (amplicon and shotgun
metagenomics) associated with long-term place-based research. By
leveraging the standard protocols developed by the EMP, molecular
microbial ecology data will be, for the first time, comparable across
these different observational sites (many of which are associated with
field stations and marine laboratories).
[![](http://press.igsb.anl.gov/earthmicrobiome/files/2012/07/Human-Food-Project-logo-transparent-e1342385256290.png)](http://humanfoodproject.com/american-gut/)
Nobody has to tell a giraffe how to eat, but for the first time in
history humans do not know what to eat. [The Human Food
Project](http://humanfoodproject.com/american-gut/) is about exploring
the nutritional and cultural landscape that selected us, our microbes,
and the foods we share(d).  

<span style="color: #3366ff">Open Microbiome Initiative</span>
==============================================================

With the democratization of sequencing and the interest in the human and
other microbiomes, it is essential that we lower barriers to entry to
the field so that everyone can participate in exploring this exciting
frontier. The [Open Microbiome
Initiative](http://openmicrobiome.org/ "Open Microbiome Initiative")
(OMI) will promote education, data integration, and potentially data
acquisition efforts that advance this goal. Our vision: open datasets,
tools and standards that everyone is encouraged to use and improve on to
speed our understanding of the links between microbes and disease.
