Why develop a database of available samples from around the world?
------------------------------------------------------------------

The EMP is an ambitous initiative to refocus microbial ecology, however,
such a initiative can only work with the support of the community. At
this stage this support should take the form of the development of the
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLE DATABASE (GESD). This database will hold
information about the types of environmental samples that are currently
available globally for the EMP. To make this feasible we are developing
a submission system, which will outline the exact fields we will require
to enable maximum comparison of sampled locations. Each sample series
will be examined by the EMP community leaders and the final selection
and will be made based on access to associated environmental context
data, and experimental metadata which are compliant with the Minimal
Information about a Metagenomic and Marker Gene Sequence (MIMS, MIMARKS
respectively). The richer the available metadata the easier it will be
to examine how the relationships between environment and biology.
Specifically we want to explore environmental parameter space and it's
role in structuring microbial ecology in ecosystems, and importantly the
feedback role of the microbial community on the environment. This is
only possible if we have sufficient parametrization of both the
community and the environment; the better the parametrization the easier
our job will be.

Can we obtain information from the metadata alone?
--------------------------------------------------

Microbes exist by responding to environmental conditions; i.e if the
temperature changes because the water in a river moves from high
altitude to lower altitude the microbial system will respond. Microbes
do not respond to changes in the geopolitical status of their current
location, unless it has a direct effect on the environmental conditions.
Therefore, the metadata collected through the GESD will enable us to
explore the range and types of environments from which we can explore
the Earth's microbiome. This can be used to determine what additional
samples we will need to collect to 'fill in the gaps' in our
exploration. For example, we may have soil samples from a pH range of
4-6.5 and 7.3-11.2 at a range of different temperatures, nutrient loads,
and soil types. To understand the full range of soil microbiota on earth
we would need to explore samples whose pH is below 4, above 11.2 and
between 6.5 and 7.3, and all at a range of different temperatures,
nutrient loads and soil types. One important factor will be time. A
biogeographic survey is only as useful as your understanding of the
history of the sample you have taken, i.e. is the community you explore
representative of that site from that time of year. Where we do not have
extensive temporal data, we will need to explore opportunities to obtain
samples which expand our understanding of the temporal changes in
community structure and their relationship to environmental conditions.
The metadata will help us to determine where this is needed.

**Submitting sample information to the GESD**
---------------------------------------------

Please contact "Gail Lesley Ackermann" \<<ackermag@ucsd.edu>\> who will
coordinate your submission. However, here is an example of the process
for submitting metadata about a soil sample collection: **<span
style="text-decoration: underline;">Soil Metadata Guide</span>**
Instructions: Go to <http://microbio.me/qiime> (Qiime website) and
create an account.  This account will work on both the Qiime and EMP
websites.  Once your account has been created, visit
<http://microbio.me/emp> (the EMP website) and sign in. Click on “Create
a new study” and fill in all the fields, then click on “create.” Next,
click on “Generate a MIMARKS-compliant metadata template.”  This will
open a page where the standard soil sample template fields are shown
(pink-high-lighted fields) as well as a list of optional fields.  Select
the appropriate fields and click on “Generate Templates.” This will
generate 2 files.  The sample\_template can be opened in Excel and then
you can transfer your metadata as appropriate. You have the option of
adding columns to the template for measurements that are not included on
either the standard template or in the optional fields.  When the
metadata sheet is complete, save the file as a tab delimited .txt file
and send it on to me for validation.     **<span
style="text-decoration: underline;">Soil sample template (EMP)</span>**

  ------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Sample\_Name**                            A unique identifier for the sample
  **Anonymized\_Name**                        Usually applies to human subjects, if not available leave blank
  **Description**                             Description of the sample—what is it?
  **Taxon\_ID**                               [NCBI Taxonomy Browser](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?mode=Tree&id=12908&lvl=3&srchmode=1&keep=1&unlock)Example: 410658 (Soil Metagenome)
  **Title**                                   A common name you also use for the sample
  **Altitude**                                The distance between surface and point being sampled in meters (for soil this is usually 0 (different from elevation)
  **Assigned\_from\_geo**                     Enter “y” or “n.”  Usually y (yes), (data assigned from a geographic source)
  **Collection\_date**                        Examples: 5/23/11, or 5/23/11 10:22:14 or 5/23/2011 or 20:25:12.  Date range may also be specified: 2007-2008, or02/2011-04/2011.
  **Country**                                 Choose from GAZ Ontology, example: GAZ: Scotland.
  **Depth**                                   Distance from the surface in meters
  **Elevation**                               The distance of the site from sea level in meters
  **Env\_Biome; Env\_Feature; Env\_Matter**   [Envo Ontology Browser](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ontology-lookup/browse.do?ontName=ENVO) *Biome:* Description of the site; *Feature:* Description of feature in the biome where sample was obtained; *Matter:* Description of material
  **Extracted\_dna\_available\_now**          Enter “y” or “n”
  **Latitude**                                Geographical origin of sample in decimal degrees (WGS84  system), not DMS[Conversion Tool](http://transition.fcc.gov/mb/audio/bickel/DDDMMSS-decimal.html)
  **Longitude**                               Geographical origin of sample in decimal degrees (WGS84  system), not DMS[Conversion Tool](http://transition.fcc.gov/mb/audio/bickel/DDDMMSS-decimal.html)
  **Physical\_sample\_available\_now**        Enter “y” or  “n”
  **Public**                                  Do you want your metadata to be accessible to the public? Enter “y” or “n.
  ------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Other field **<span style="text-decoration: underline;">options
</span>**have also been defined and can be selected based on the
information collected regarding your samples:

agrochem\_addition (addition of fertilizers) al\_sat (aluminum
saturation), al\_sat\_meth (method for determining al\_sat),
annual\_season\_precpt (annual seasonal precipitation in mm),
annual\_seasonal\_temp(mean annual and seasonal temp ^o^C),
cur\_land\_use (current land use), cur\_vegetation (vegetation
classification), cur\_vegetation\_method (reference or method used to
determine vegetation classification), drainage\_class (drainage
classification from a standard system like USDA), extreme\_event
(unusual physical events that may have affected microbial populations),
extreme\_salinity (measured salinity), salinity\_method reference or
method used to determine salinity), fao\_class (soil classification from
the FAO world reference database for soil resources), fire (historical
and/or physical evidence of fire), flooding (historical and/or physical
evidence of flooding), heavy\_metals (concentration and type),
heavy\_metal\_meth (reference or method used for determining
concentrations of heavy metals), horizon\_method (reference or method
used to determine the horizon), microbial\_biomass (organic matter in
soil from living organisms smaller than 5-10mm, in mgC or mgN/kg soil),
ph (pH), ph\_method (reference or method used in determining pH),
soil\_type (soil series name), soil\_type\_method (reference or method
used to determine soil type), texture (relative proportion of different
grain sizes in a soil expressed as pervcentage sand(50mm-2mm), silt
(2-50mm) and clay (\<2mm) with textural name optional), texture\_meth
(reference or method used to determine texture), tot\_nitro (total
amount of nitrogenous substance), tot\_n\_meth (reference or method used
to determine the total N), tot\_org\_carb (total organic carbon
content), tot\_org\_c\_meth (reference or method used to determine total
C), water\_content\_soil (water content in g/g or cm^3^/cm^3^),
water\_content\_soil\_method (reference or method used to determine
water content). **You may also add fields that are not listed here based
on other parameters you have measured. Simply add these columns to your
sheet, making sure that the “column\_name” you select follows the
appropriate format.**
